docs: [FC-0074] centralize docs for the hooks extension framework (#599)
openedx/docs.openedx.org: source/developers/concepts/hooks_extension_framework.rst

Hooks Extension Framework
#########################

What is the Hooks Extension Framework?
**************************************

> Based on the :doc:`edx-platform:concepts/extension_points`, this framework aims to extend the Open edX platform in a maintainable way without modifying its core. The main goal is to leverage the existing extension capabilities provided by the `Open edX Django plugins`_ architecture, allowing developers to implement new features to fit customer needs while reducing the need for core modifications and minimizing maintenance efforts.

Author: ```suggestion
Based on the :doc:`edx-platform:concepts/extension_points`, this framework aims to extend the Open edX platform in a maintainable way without modifying its core. The main goal is to leverage the existing extension capabilities provided by the `Open edX Django plugins`_ architecture, allowing developers to implement new features while reducing the need for core modifications and minimizing maintenance efforts.
```

Author: @felipemontoya: would this be enough to address your concern?

Author: Done: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/pull/599/commits/970122ddbb7c23d4c2f28ef9ee7a42e950d5e510

.. For more detailed use cases, see the TODO: ADD REFERENCE TO REAL LIFE USE CASES documentation.

In summary, events can be used to integrate application components with each other or with external services, allowing them to communicate, synchronize, and perform additional actions when specific triggers occur.

You can review the :doc:`Open edX Events <openedx-events:index>` documentation for more information on :doc:`openedx-events:how-tos/using-events` in your project. This documentation includes a list of :doc:`openedx-events:reference/events` and much more.

When to use an Open edX Filter?
-------------------------------

A developer might use an Open edX Filter in order to perform the following actions. Note that this is not an exhaustive list.

- Enrich the data or parameters used to a specific component, e.g., fetch reusable LTI configurations from external plugins.
- Enforce specific constraints or business rules of a specific component, e.g., don't allow registration for non-authorized email domains.
- Implement additional features or behavior in a specific component, e.g., add registration extra fields to the user registration form.

> .. For more detailed use cases, see the TODO: ADD REFERENCE TO REAL LIFE USE CASES documentation.

Reviewer: This is good to merge I guess after the real life examples docs are merged!

Reviewer: @mariajgrimaldi before I merge, will you plan to address this in a different PR?

Author: I was going to, but I can quickly do it right now. I'll let you know once it's done.

=========================
Hooks Extension Framework

> =========================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#########################
```

In docs.openedx.org, we use the following headings:

H1: `#` (4 lines in the character)
H2: `*` (3 lines)
H3: `=` (2 lines)
H4: `-`

Author: Thank you! Done: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/pull/599/commits/a88af4d9f0b50091f95ef1ac2a07c7d1d7bd1872

What is the Hooks Extension Framework?

> =======================================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*****************************************************
```

Author: Thank you, done: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/pull/599/commits/a88af4d9f0b50091f95ef1ac2a07c7d1d7bd1872

> Based on the `open-closed principle`_, this framework aims to extend the Open edX platform in a maintainable way without modifying its core. The main goal is to leverage the existing extension capabilities provided by the plugin architecture, allowing developers to implement new features to fit customer needs while reducing the need for core modifications and minimizing maintenance efforts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on the :doc:`edx-platform:open-release-quince.master/concepts/extension_points`, this framework aims to extend the Open edX platform in a maintainable way without modifying its core. The main goal is to leverage the existing extension capabilities provided by the plugin architecture, allowing developers to implement new features to fit customer needs while reducing the need for core modifications and minimizing maintenance efforts.
```

Is there a reason this document is under the quince page tree, and not its own concept document?

Author: ^ Fixed: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/pull/599/commits/c953566eae941823a601d68f712856d501fd5119

> Hooks are a list of places in the Open edX platform where externally defined functions can take place. These functions may alter what the user sees or experiences on the platform, while in other cases, they act as notifications. All hooks are designed to be extended through `Open edX Django plugins`_ and configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hooks are places in the Open edX platform where externally defined functions can take place. These functions may alter what the user sees or experiences on the platform, while in other cases, they act as notifications. All hooks are designed to be extended through `Open edX Django plugins`_ and configurations.
```

Hooks can be of two types: events and filters. Events are signals sent in specific places whose receivers can extend functionality, while filters are functions that can modify the application's behavior. To allow extension developers to use these definitions in their implementations, both kinds of hooks are defined in lightweight external libraries:

* `openedx-filters`_
* `openedx-events`_

> The main goal of the framework is that developers can use it to change the platform's functionality as needed and still migrate to newer Open edX releases with little to no development effort. So, the framework is designed with stability in mind, meaning it is versioned and backward compatible as much as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The framework's main goal is to empower developers to change the platform's functionality as needed while enabling them to migrate to newer Open edX releases with little to no development effort. The framework is designed with stability in mind, meaning it is versioned and backward compatible as much as possible.
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestion! Done: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/pull/599/commits/c953566eae941823a601d68f712856d501fd5119

> A longer description of the framework and its history can be found in `OEP 50`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A longer description of the framework and its history can be found in :doc:`openedx-proposals:architectural-decisions/oep-0050-hooks-extension-framework`
```

This will make it a bit more resilient of a link

Author: Would this work for all documents under docs.openedx.org? I'm not sure how this cross referencing works.

Author: Thank you for the suggestion! Now I'm working with the intersphinx mapping instead: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/pull/599/commits/c953566eae941823a601d68f712856d501fd5119

> .. _OEP 50: https://open-edx-proposals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/oep-0050-hooks-extension-framework.html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Done! Now I'm working with the intersphinx mapping instead: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/pull/599/commits/c953566eae941823a601d68f712856d501fd5119

.. _openedx-filters: https://github.com/openedx/openedx-filters
.. _openedx-events: https://github.com/openedx/openedx-events

> .. _open-closed principle: https://docs.openedx.org/projects/edx-platform/en/open-release-quince.master/concepts/extension_points.html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: ^ Done! https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/pull/599/commits/c953566eae941823a601d68f712856d501fd5119

Why adopt the Hooks Extension Framework?

> ========================================

Reviewer: Use `*`

Author: Thank you, done: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/commit/a88af4d9f0b50091f95ef1ac2a07c7d1d7bd1872

Stable and Maintainable Extensions

> ----------------------------------

Reviewer: Use `=`

Author: Thank you, done: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/commit/a88af4d9f0b50091f95ef1ac2a07c7d1d7bd1872

> The Hooks Extension Framework allows developers to extend the platform's functionality in a stable, maintainable, and decoupled way ensuring easier upgrades and long-term stability by removing the need to modify the core in an significant way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Hooks Extension Framework allows developers to extend the platform's functionality in a stable, maintainable, and decoupled way ensuring easier upgrades and long-term stability by removing the need to modify the core in a significant way.
```

Author: Thank you again! https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/pull/599/commits/c953566eae941823a601d68f712856d501fd5119

Contained Solution Implementation

> ---------------------------------

Reviewer: Use `=`

Author: Thank you, done: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/commit/a88af4d9f0b50091f95ef1ac2a07c7d1d7bd1872

By avoiding core modifications, the framework promotes self-contained solutions, eliminating the need for custom code to coexist with core logic which lowers maintenance costs for extension developers.

Leveraging the Open edX Plugin Extension Mechanism

> --------------------------------------------------

Reviewer: Use `=`

The framework allows developers to implement custom business logic and integrations directly in plugins. This keeps core modifications minimal, focusing maintenance and development efforts on plugins, where solutions can be built and maintained independently of the core platform.

Standardization

> ---------------

Reviewer: Use `=`

Author: Thank you, done: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/commit/a88af4d9f0b50091f95ef1ac2a07c7d1d7bd1872

> Both filters and events implementations implement an approach for adding additional features, such as communication between services or backend flow control. With these standards in place, it’s easy to identify when and how to use the framework as a solution, ensuring a consistent and predictable approach to extending the platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The implementation of both filters and events allows for adding additional features, such as communication between services or backend flow control.
```

I don't really understand what the second sentence means (" With these standards in place, it’s easy to identify when and how to use the framework as a solution, ensuring a consistent and predictable approach to extending the platform.") - could you explain what you're trying to convey, so I can suggest a rewording? I'm particularly unsure of what "these standards" means.

Author: Events and filters solve two problems: 1. Communication and 2. Application behavior modifications, respectively. So, if a problem can be solved by one of the two, then developers can use events/filters. I think this gives developers a standard to follow for extensibility if the use case fits what I previously mentioned. Does this make sense?

Author: Events and filters are used for 1. Communication and 2. Application behavior modifications, respectively. So, if a problem can be solved by one of those two options, then the implementation would be pretty straightforward—at least the extension part of it. This would give developers a standard to follow for extensibility if the use case fits what I previously mentioned. Does this make sense?

Author: What do you think about using this instead?

> Filters and events provide developers with a standard for adding new features to the platform through extension mechanisms. Events primarily handle communication or synchronization between different parts of the application, while filters modify application behavior. If a problem can be addressed through one of these two options, the implementation becomes pretty straightforward. 

I'm not quite sure if "Standardization" is the best title for this, though.

Author: @sarina: what do you think about my latest suggestion?

Reduce Fork Modifications

> -------------------------

Reviewer: I don't think this section is needed, it's very close to the `Contained Solution Implementation` section. Maybe just add a sentence about forks in that section.

Author: Agreed. I think having it in the contained solutions section would be more impactful: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/pull/599/commits/c953566eae941823a601d68f712856d501fd5119

The need to modify logic in forks is minimized, as most extensions can now be implementing using the framework, keeping forks closer to the core and easier to manage.

Community Compatibility

> ------------------------

Reviewer: Use `=`

Author: Thank you, done: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/commit/a88af4d9f0b50091f95ef1ac2a07c7d1d7bd1872

The framework allows for shorter and more agile contribution cycles. By adding standardized extension points, contributors avoid creating customer-specific logic, making development more community-friendly.

Backward Compatibility

> -----------------------

Reviewer: Use `=`

Author: Thank you, done: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/commit/a88af4d9f0b50091f95ef1ac2a07c7d1d7bd1872

> Hooks are designed to be backward compatible, guaranteeing stability across releases and making it easier to upgrade without breaking existing functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hooks are designed to be backwards compatible, guaranteeing stability across releases and making it easier to upgrade without breaking existing functionality.
```

Does the framework provide an explicit guarantee to this effect?

Author: This is enforced by the versioning policy we have in place, e.g.: https://github.com/openedx/openedx-events/blob/main/docs/decisions/0002-events-naming-and-versioning.rst#consequences. I'm going to refer to the ADR in the document.

Author: ^ Done: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/pull/599/commits/c953566eae941823a601d68f712856d501fd5119

Open edX Events and Filters

> ============================

Reviewer: Use `*`

Author: Thank you, done: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/commit/a88af4d9f0b50091f95ef1ac2a07c7d1d7bd1872

Open edX Events

> ----------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
============
```

Author: Thank you, done: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/commit/a88af4d9f0b50091f95ef1ac2a07c7d1d7bd1872

> Events are Open edX-specific Django signals sent in specific places on the Open edX platform. They allow developers to listen to these signals and perform additional processing based on the event data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Events are Open edX-specific Django signals sent in specific places on the Open edX platform. Developers write code that listens to these signals and performs additional processing based on the event data.
```

Author: Thank you for the suggestion! https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/pull/599/commits/c953566eae941823a601d68f712856d501fd5119

To start using Open edX Events in your project, see the `Open edX Events`_ documentation.

> .. _Open edX Events: https://docs.openedx.org/projects/openedx-events/en/latest/

Reviewer: It'd be good to put this document in the intersphinx mapping (https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/tree/main/source#L67-L109) and reference it directly as a `:doc:`

Author: Sorry, I'm not sure where [source#L67-L109](https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/tree/main/source#L67-L109) should take me to.

Author: ^ Done: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/pull/599/commits/c953566eae941823a601d68f712856d501fd5119

Open edX Filters

> -----------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
================
```

Author: Thank you, done: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/commit/a88af4d9f0b50091f95ef1ac2a07c7d1d7bd1872

Filters are functions that can modify the application's behavior by altering input data or halting execution based on specific conditions. They allow developers to implement application flow control based on their business logic or requirements without directly modifying the application code.

To start using Open edX Filters in your project, see the `Open edX Filters`_ documentation.

> .. _Open edX Filters: https://docs.openedx.org/projects/openedx-filters/en/latest/

Reviewer: It'd be good to put this document in the intersphinx mapping (https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/tree/main/source#L67-L109) and reference it directly as a `:doc:`

Author: Agreed! https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/pull/599/commits/c953566eae941823a601d68f712856d501fd5119

Differences between Events and Filters

> ---------------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=============================
```

Author: Thank you, done: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/commit/a88af4d9f0b50091f95ef1ac2a07c7d1d7bd1872

|                    |  metadata associated with the event.                                   |  and the parameters it should receive.                      |
+--------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Implementation** |  Implemented using `Django signals`_, which allow                      |  Implemented using an accumulative pipeline mechanism which |
|                    |  developers to send and receive notifications that an action happened  |  takes a set of arguments and returns a modified set        |
|                    |  within a Django application.                                          |  to the caller or raises exceptions during                  |
|                    |                                                                        |  processing.                                                |
+--------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+

> | **Use cases**      |  Send an email notification when a user enrolls in a course.           |  Include additional information in an API endpoint response.|

Reviewer: Could you provide a more detailed example for a filter?

Author: I changed this example to "Prevent the enrollment of non-authorized users" https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/pull/599/commits/c953566eae941823a601d68f712856d501fd5119

> |                    |  an email notification.                                                |                                                             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|                    |                                                                    |                                                             |
```

+--------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+

.. _Django signals: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/4.2/topics/signals/

How to know when to use an Event or a Filter?
----------------------------------------------

When to use an Open edX Event?

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-----------------------------------------
```

Author: Thank you, done: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/commit/a88af4d9f0b50091f95ef1ac2a07c7d1d7bd1872

> Use an Open edX Event when but not limited to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A developer might use an Open edX Event in order to perform the following actions. Note that this is not an exhaustive list.
```

- Trigger custom logic or processing in response to specific actions within the platform, e.g., updating a search index after a course block is modified.
- Communicate, synchronize, or coordinate with other components or services based on specific events or actions, e.g., send certificate data from LMS to credentials service to keep models up to date.
- Integrate with external systems or services based on specific events or actions within the platform, e.g., send user data to third-party services upon registration for marketing purposes.

In summary, events can be used to integrate application components with each other or with external services, allowing them to communicate, synchronize, and perform additional actions when specific triggers occur.

You can review the `Open edX Events`_ documentation for more information on `how to use events`_ in your project. This documentation includes a `list of available events`_ and `how to implement event receivers`_.

> .. _Open edX Events: https://docs.openedx.org/projects/openedx-events/en/latest/

Reviewer: This is the second definition of this in the document. I suggest compiling your links at the very end of the document, rather than the end of each section, to avoid duplicates.

Author: Thank you, that'd be better indeed. You can review the changes here: Here you can review the changes:

.. _how to use events: https://docs.openedx.org/projects/openedx-events/en/latest/how-tos/using-events.html
.. _list of available events: https://docs.openedx.org/projects/openedx-events/en/latest/reference/events.html
.. _how to implement event receivers: https://docs.openedx.org/projects/openedx-events/en/latest/how-tos/using-events.html#receiving-events

When to use an Open edX Filter?

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-----------------------------------------
```

Author: Thank you, done: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/commit/a88af4d9f0b50091f95ef1ac2a07c7d1d7bd1872

> Use an Open edX Filter when but not limited to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A developer might use an Open edX Filter in order to perform the following actions. Note that this is not an exhaustive list.```

Author: Thank you, you can review the changes here: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/commit/c953566eae941823a601d68f712856d501fd5119

- Enrich the data or parameters passed to a specific component, e.g., fetch reusable LTI configurations from external plugins.

> - Intercept and modify the input of a specific component, e.g., include "Edit" link to an HTML block if certain conditions are met.

Reviewer: I'm not sure this is the best example of modifying a component. What are some others?

Author: All these examples were extracted from a list of real-life use cases we've compiled: https://github.com/mariajgrimaldi/openedx-events-filters-analysis/blob/main/docs/Extensions_built_using_Hooks_Extensions_Framework.pdf. Since I'm writing the use-case list, that is just a filtered version of that document, I'll get some examples from there instead.

Author: You can review the changes here: https://github.com/openedx/docs.openedx.org/commit/c953566eae941823a601d68f712856d501fd5119
